JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
In the first of two head-turning
foreign policy movies today,
the U.S. abstains from a U.N.
Security Council vote condemning
Israel for its settlements,
opening up a public split
between the current
and future president.
Then, President-elect
Trump calls for an arms
race, vowing to expand
the U.S. nuclear weapons
arsenal and sending
a ripple through the
international community.
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze a full week of news.
Plus, service men and women from
around the world celebrate the
holidays with their rendition
of "12 Days of Christmas."
(VIDEO CLIP PLAYS)
WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour".
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: President Obama has
broken with decades of the
U.S. diplomatic practice of
defending Israel at the United
Nations by using the U.S.
veto to squash resolutions
of disapproval.
Today, instead, the
U.S. abstained from the
latest such resolution,
despite pressure from
Israeli government and
President-elect Trump.
The vote was 14 to nothing, as
the Security Council condemned
Israeli settlement building
on lands the Palestinians want.
Ambassador Samantha Power
defended the U.S. decision.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
SAMANTHA POWER, U.S. AMBASSADOR
TO THE UNITED NATIONS: The
United States has been sending
a message that the settlements
must stop privately and publicly
for nearly five decades.
Our vote today is fully in
line with the bipartisan
history of how American
presidents have approached
both the issue and
the role of this body.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: Israel rejected
the resolution and the
U.S. abstention, and
so did top Republicans
in Congress.
House Speaker Paul Ryan called
the administration's action,
quote, "absolutely shameful".
And South Carolina
Senator Lindsey Graham
said the president's
foreign policy "has gone
from naive and foolish
to flat-out reckless."
President-elect Trump who had
urged the White House to veto
the resolution tweeted that,
quote, "things will be
different after January 20th"
-- when he takes office.
We'll get the White
House perspective, right
after the news summary.
The president-elect also added
more fuel to the fire today over
his views on nuclear weapons.
John Yang has that story.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JOHN YANG, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: A
Christmas-themed cable
morning show was the
messenger for President-elect
Trump's latest salvo on the
national's nuclear arsenal.
Mr. Trump called MSNBC's
Mika Brzezinski during
a commercial break.
SCARBOROUGH: The
president-elect told you what?
MIKA BRZEZINSKI, MSNBC ANCHOR:
Let it be an arms race.
We will outmatch
them at every pass.
SCARBOROUGH: And
outlast them all.
BRZEZINSKI: And
MATT LAUER, NBC NEWS
ANCHOR: But if there's
going to be an arms race--
SEAN SPICER, INCOMING WHITE
HOUSE PRESS SECRETARY:
There's not going to be.
LAUER: That's what
he said, so be it?
We will match them
at every turn?
SPICER: There's not going to
be 'cause he's going to ensure
that other countries get the
message that he's not going
to sit back and allow that.
And what's going to happen is,
they will come to their senses,
and we will all be just fine.
YANG: It was all part of
the ongoing fallout from
the president-elect's
tweet yesterday,
"The United States must greatly
strengthen and expand its
nuclear capability until such
time as the world comes to
its senses regarding nukes."
Earlier, Russian President
Vladimir Putin had addressed top
military officials in Moscow:
YANG: Today, Mr. Putin told a
year-end news conference that
Russia does not want "an arms
race that we can't afford."
PUTIN (through translator):
Regarding the newly
elected President
Trump, there is nothing
new here.
He was talking during his
campaign about the importance of
strengthening the nuclear aspect
of the United States.
There is nothing unusual.
YANG: Today, Mr. Trump released
a letter the Russian leader
sent him on December 15th.
"Relations between Russia and
the U.S. remain an important
factor in ensuring stability
and security of
the modern world."
President Putin called for
"real steps" to restore
"bilateral cooperation."
Mr. Trump said, "I hope both
sides are able to live up to
these thoughts, and we do not
have to travel an
alternate path."
Chinese foreign ministry
officials said they're
watching closely, too.
HUA CHUNYING, SPOKESMAN, CHINESE
FOREIGN MINISTRY (through
translator): We have noticed the
relevant reports, and
are also paying attention
to what policies the
new U.S. government will
adopt.
China always upholds and
actively advocates the complete
ban and thorough destruction
of nuclear weapons.
In addition, the United States
is moving forward with a program
to upgrade America's aging
nuclear stock pile, at an
estimated cost of $1 trillion.
For the "PBS NewsHour",
I'm John yang
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news, the FBI
warned that Islamic State
supporters are urging
attacks on U.S. holiday
gatherings and churches,
over Christmas.
That's in a bulletin from
the FBI and the Department
of Homeland Security.
There are no specific threats,
but a list of U.S. churches
has been posted on a social
media site used
by the militants.
Rohit Kachroo of
Independent Television
News reports from Berlin.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
ROHIT KACHROO, INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS: Where and when
it was filmed is not clear,
but the sentiment is
emphatic -- he pledges
allegiance to the IS leader.
A video selfie, apparent proof
he was inspired by the group.
This morning, his body lay
on the ground in Milan after
a shootout with police.
Later, the Italian
interior minister confirmed
the manhunt was over.
MARCO MINNITI (through
translator): The person
killed, and this is the
result of the investigation,
is without a shadow of a doubt
Anis Amri, the suspect of the
terrorist attack in Berlin.
From the city's central station,
it was then on to Chiasso-San
Giovanni where he was shot
dead by police as he opened
fire during a routine check
at 3:00 a.m. this morning.
ANGELA MERKEL, GERMAN CHANCELLOR
(through translator): I
told the president we will
speed up the repatriation
process and increase
the number of people
who will be repatriated.
KACHROO: He is no longer
wanted, the man who slipped
through net after net.
And although the manhunt is
now over, what investigators
can't see is whether there were
more suspects involved
in planning this plot.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: This evening,
President-elect Trump
tweeted that the Amri
video statement showed,
quote, "such hatred," and he
asked, "When will the U.S.
and all countries fight back?"
Russia's President Putin
has dismissed allegations
that the Kremlin tried
to influence the U.S.
elections.
At his year-end news
conference today, he
brushed aside complaints
about Russian hacking.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
PUTIN (through translator): The
current U.S. administration and
the Democratic Party leadership
are trying to blame external
factors for all their problems.
They are losing on all
fronts, and looking elsewhere
for things to blame.
In my opinion, it
is humiliating.
One must be able to
lose with dignity.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: Putin also
said that President-elect
Trump won because he
understood the mood of
the American people.
China warned today of a possible
showdown with the incoming
Trump administration over
trade.
The state-run "China
Daily" strongly criticized
Peter Navarro, named to
lead a new White House
National Trade Council.
He has accused China
of waging economic war.
In an editorial, the newspaper
said, quote, "Any move to damage
the win-win trade relationship
will only result in a
loss for both sides."
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones Industrial Average gained
nearly 15 points to close at
19,933.
The NASDAQ rose 15 points, and
the S&P 500 added nearly three.
For the week, all three indexes
rose a fraction of a percent.
Still to come on the
"NewsHour": why the U.S.
broke a longstanding
practice of protecting
Israel at the U.N.; what
to make of the president-
elect's nuclear arms
comments; a new Ebola
vaccine that's 100 percent
effective, and much more.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: So, why did the Obama
administration abstain from
voting on the United Nations
Security Council resolution
condemning Israeli
settlements in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem?
We ask Ben Rhodes, deputy
national security advisor for
strategic communications to the
president.
Ben Rhodes, welcome.
It is the case that the U.S.
has long opposed these Israeli
settlements but, at the same
time, it has protected Israel
in the U.N. against these
condemning resolutions.
Why the shift?
BEN RHODES, DEPUTY NATIONAL
SECURITY ADVISOR: Well, look,
first of all, it's bipartisan
tradition to opposed
settlements, as you mentioned.
There have been many resolutions
in the past under bipartisan
administrations that address
the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The fact of the matter
is, we vetoed a resolution
that addressed settlements
in 2011, and look
what's happened since.
We've had failed peace processes
after failed peace process,
and the pace of settlement
construction has
accelerated significantly.
And just recently, you
had the Israeli prime
minister saying that this
is the most pro-settlement
in administration in Israeli
history, the Israeli government
that is currently in place.
We believe that at this
pace, a two-state solution
could be put at risk.
We believe that would
be profoundly bad for
Israel and its security.
And so, that's why the president
took the position that he did.
WOODRUFF: It comes across,
though, Ben Rhodes, though, as
a parting shot at Israel on the
part of President Obama.
RHODES: Well, look, we have a
record that we'll put up next
to anybody in terms of support
for Israel.
In fact, we just concluded
a $38 billion ten year
MOU with respect to
their security assistance
from the United States.
The fact of the matter is,
though, I think if you look at
the map of the West Bank, if
you look at the future of
the two-state solution,
these settlements are
encroaching further
and further beyond the
separation barrier that
the Israelis themselves
built, thousands
of new settlements are being
constructed and, frankly, if
these trends continue, it will
be impossible to realize
a two-state solution.
And the fact of the matter
is, we can't just have a peace
process or a two-state solution
as an empty talking point.
If we really want to be able
to have a prospect for peace,
we have to be clear about what
we're against and that includes
the type of settlements and
I'd say as the resolution
points out, the type of
incitement to violence
on the Palestinian side
that have been obstacles
to peace.
WOODRUFF: Well, let me just
read you what - - among other
things the comments from Prime
Minister Netanyahu
after this happened.
He said, "The National Security
Council has disgracefully
ganged up on the one democracy
in the Middle East."
The Israeli government is
saying this was a shameful
resolution, they're not going
to abide by it.
RHODES: Look, we've taken a lot
of criticism from the Israeli
government over the years.
If you look at our record,
unprecedented military
intelligence cooperation,
a significant security
assistance upgrades.
But again, let's talk about
what the resolution addressed
-- the settlement construction.
That's the conversation
that the Israeli
government is not having.
And, in fact, you had this
prime minister say this is the
most pro-settlement Israeli
government in history.
Frankly, that statement
is entirely inconsistent
with the two-state
solution that the Israeli
government in the past has
said they supported, that many
members of Congress support.
At a certain point, we all
just have to stop and look at
the map and look at the facts
and say, if these settlements
continue, is the two-state
solution impossible?
And that clearly
is the trend line.
It's evident for everybody
to see, and that's what we
should be talking about.
WOODRUFF: President-elect Trump,
as you know, had urged the White
House to veto this resolution
condemning Israel.
We know that he was in
touch with the president of
Egypt to try to intervene.
Was this appropriate
on his part?
RHODES: Well, look, we
believe that there is
one president at a time.
Frankly, after January
20, the president-elect
will get to pursue this
approach and whatever
other one he wants
on these issues.
Again, I would say, it's very
important, this is bipartisan
position to oppose continued
settlements and it's a
bipartisan history that there'd
been resolutions at the U.N.
I keep hearing this
is unprecedented.
There were six resolutions under
George W. Bush addressed the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
including one that embraced the
road map the Bush administration
put forward for a Palestinian
state by 2005.
That was over a decade ago.
So, the question is, if we are
against the continued settlement
activity and for a two-state
solution, why are we going
to continue with the status
quo, on which we see trends on
both sides, Israeli
and Palestinian trends,
that are putting peace
farther and farther
away?
WOODRUFF: You say it's
bipartisan, but as you
very well know, the
leadership -- Republican
leadership in the Congress is
raining down now with criticism,
the incoming Democratic
leader in the Senate, Senator
Schumer from New York, is
criticizing this decision.
It sounds like the
administration is, if
not alone, certainly is
in the minority on this
position today.
RHODES: Well, look, we respect,
of course, friends on both
sides of the aisle who have
expressed different
views on this.
Again, I think the question is
going to be when history looks
at these types of decisions,
when people look back and
they say, you saw tens of
thousands of settlements
being constructed,
you saw as was addressed in
the resolution, incitement to
violence on the Palestinian
side.
The question is, do we not have
responsibility to lay down a
marker here about what we think
is actual U.S. policy?
You have a resolution like this
that is entirely consistent with
the policy, how can we continue
to veto that over
and over again?
WOODRUFF: Finally, are you
comfortable -- is the president
comfortable with this knowing
that President-elect Trump is
saying he's going to undo this
as soon as he takes office
in a few weeks?
Is it worth it?
WOODRUFF: Ben Rhodes, deputy
national security advisor to
the president -- thank you very
much.
RHODES: Thank you.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: We return now to
President-elect Trump's comments
about the need to build up
the United States'
nuclear arsenal -- and
to John Yang for that.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
YANG: Are the president- elect's
tweets and comments signaling
a change in U.S. nuclear
weapons policy?
And should the nation beef
up its nuclear arsenal?
For that, we turn to Matthew
Kroenig, an associate
professor at Georgetown
University who's written
extensively about nuclear
weapons, and Joseph
Cirincione, the president
of the Ploughshares
Fund, a non-profit organization
that advocates for disarmament.
He, too, has written
widely on the subject.
Gentlemen, thank you both
for joining us tonight.
Mr. Cirincione, let me start
with you, when you hear or
read the president-elect saying
that the United States must
greatly strengthen and expand
its nuclear capability and then
tell Mika Brzezinski this
morning, "Let it be an arms
race," what's your reaction?
JOSEPH CIRINCIONE,
PLOUGHSHARES FUND: Stunned.
An ill-considered,
disrespectful and dangerous
series of statements.
This would upend decades of
Republican and Democratic policy
that ever since Ronald Reagan
has been reducing nuclear
arsenals, both in the United
States and Russia and around the
world, stopping other countries
from getting nuclear weapons.
By using that word
"expand", he says he wants
to grow the arsenal or
grow the capabilities.
Look, nobody is against keeping
a strong nuclear deterrent.
If that's all he said, we
wouldn't be having this debate.
President Obama has put
in train a trillion-dollar
program to replace every
single nuclear weapon
we have over the next 25 years.
Donald Trump seems to be saying
he wants to go ahead with this.
His advisors tried to walk it
back, but he himself said this
morning, let it be an arms
race.
That is an extremely dangerous
posture, that's why people
all over the globe are worried
and talking about this today.
YANG: Matthew Kroenig,
what's your take?
MATTHEW KROENIG, GEORGETOWN
UNIVERSITY: Well, the statement
is certainly controversial but
I think Trump is
basically right.
U.S. nuclear policy in
the U.S. can't be static,
it has to respond to
international politics
and all America's nuclear
armed rivals, Russia,
China, North Korea, are
expanding and modernizing
their arsenals.
So, it doesn't make sense
for the United States
to continue reducing its
arsenal as our adversaries
are going in the
other directions.
And moreover, many of
these countries, especially
Russia, are relying
more not less on nuclear
weapons in their strategy.
So, again, the United States
needs to take that into account
as it formulates its own
nuclear posture.
And so, I think some
strengthening of U.S.
nuclear strategy and
U.S. nuclear posture
has been long overdue.
YANG: Matthew Kroenig, when you
say the United States shouldn't
be reducing its arsenal,
but isn't that what's
called for under an
existing treaty with Russia?
KROENIG: Well, the existing
treaty with Russia, the new
START treaty was signed in 2011.
According to the treaty,
both countries can
have 1,550 deployed
strategic nuclear weapons.
Right now, the United States
is actually well under
200 or so warheads under.
The Russians are
250 warheads above.
So, there is a gap of
about 400 warheads that's
worrying in and of itself,
and it raises questions
about Russia -- whether
Russia actually intends
to follow through on
this agreement or not.
So, this is one of the measures
that a new president can
take to strengthen America's
nuclear arsenal to increase
the size of the arsenal, at
least to the limits allowed for
under new START.
YANG: You're shaking your head.
CIRINCIONE: Well, that's because
he's playing with numbers.
Yes, it's true, we both
have about 7,000 warheads
in our total inventory
and the ones that the
treaty counts, you know,
we're a couple hundred under.
But we have more
launchers, more missiles,
more delivery vehicles.
We're a couple hundred over
where the Russians are.
But at these levels, those
numbers don't matter.
We both have enough
weapons to destroy the
world several times over.
We don't need to expand this.
And here's the real problem,
when the two big guys, the
people with 95 percent of the
world's arsenals, U.S. and
Russia together have 95 percent
of all the weapons in the
world, when we say we need
more, what is China to think?
They have about 200.
Do they start building more?
How about India and Pakistan?
And that's the big worry
that you have here is
this ill-considered
tweet could launch
a global arms race.
Twitter is fine for criticizing
Alec Baldwin, but don't
use it to make U.S. policy.
Mr. Trump, step away
from the Twitter.
YANG: Go ahead.
KROENIG: Three thoughts on that.
One, there's a 400 warhead
difference, I do disagree,
I do think that matters.
And even if we don't think it
matters, the Russians pay close
attention to nuclear weapons.
They rely more on nuclear
weapons in their strategy.
And so, I think they think this
difference matters and they
say, see, this U.S. failure
to respond to some of their
actions as sign of weakness.
And in terms of this
idea that if we reduce
our arsenal, somehow
China and other countries
are going to come along,
that was the position
that really underline
the Obama administration
nuclear strategy and
we've seen that it hasn't
worked, as the United
States reduced its arsenal,
other countries have gone
in the other directions.
So, I don't see this
as the United States
starting an arms race.
Quite the contrary, it's really
responding to what's going
on in these other countries.
And I think a failure
to respond is what would
be really dangerous.
I think it would incentivize
further nuclear aggression.
YANG: And, Mr. Cirincione, even
if this is a continuation of
the Obama policy to modernize
the arsenal, you think that even
the Obama policy is a bad idea?
Is that what I take
from what you said?
CIRINCIONE: Absolutely.
The very first thing General
Mattis is going to find out
when he takes over as secretary
of defense is we don't have
the money to pay for the
programs that are on the books.
For example, if the Navy
goes ahead and builds
a whole new fleet of
ballistic missile submarines
in the next decade, it has
to cut its conventional
navy by 50 percent.
Who would make that
kind of choice?
So, these are some of the
considerations that will
face the new administration.
And here's the upside of this
-- let's say this is all about
negotiating leverage, this
is Mr. Trump opening up closed
issues, looking for bargaining
in ahead of his meeting with
Vladimir Putin, which
will probably occur in the
beginning of next year.
Well, here's where he could cash
in, he should take a page from
Ronald Reagan, and negotiate
with Putin, deep cuts in both
sides' nuclear forces, get rid
of these unnecessary weapons
we don't need, save hundreds
of billions of dollars to use
for conventional forces, and
really make a name for himself.
This could be the
deal of a lifetime.
This would put him in the
history books and then we won't
be talking about these silly
tweets.
YANG: Matthew Kroenig,
what about that?
He's a dealmaker, he's
businessman and he talks about
trying to keep his negotiating
opponents off balance
and that sort of thing.
Can we learn anything or take
anything from this about what
kind of foreign policy President
Trump will be?
KROENIG: Well, two points.
First to Joe, first
on the modernization.
Joe has thought a lot about
these issues, but he is
outside the mainstream.
There is a bipartisan consensus
that the United States needs
to modernize the arsenal.
This was Obama
administration's policy.
It has support from
Republicans and that should
go ahead under Trump.
Joe also raised
the issue of cost.
But the cost of these
modernization programs,
you mentioned $1 trillion
over 30 years, but
that comes to about 5 percent
of the U.S. defense budget.
So, current Secretary of Defense
Ash Carter has said this is
the bedrock of our security.
Former Secretary of Defense
Chuck Hagel has said it's the
most important mission of the
Department of Defense.
So, I don't think anybody
thinks 5 percent is too much
for the most important mission
of the Department of Defense.
On your question, what
does this signal about
Trump's foreign policy?
It's difficult to know
whether this means a change in
U.S. nuclear policy or not.
All we have to go on is a
tweet and a couple of tweets
and a couple of statements.
It may mean just continuing
Obama's policy of modernization.
But I am hopeful that
it means strengthening
the arsenal because I
do think there are some
things the United
States can do within its
international obligations
to strengthen deterrence.
YANG: I'm sorry, I'm afraid
we have to leave there.
Matthew Kroenig
and Joe Cirincione,
thanks for joining us.
CIRINCIONE: Thank you.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Next, a long
looked-for breakthrough
in the battle against
the deadly Ebola virus.
One experimental vaccine
has been shown to be 100
percent effective on humans.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
HARI SREENIVASAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: The results of
a two-year trial led by the
World Health Organization
were published in the
journal "Lancet" yesterday.
They showed that of nearly 6,000
people vaccinated in Guinea last
year, none had contracted Ebola
after a ten-day period.
While in the group not
vaccinated, 23 cases developed.
The vaccine still needs
regulatory approval,
but is considered so
effective that some 300,000
doses have already
been stockpiled.
The 2014 Ebola epidemic in West
Africa killed 11,000 people.
For more on this promising
news, we turn once again
to Dr. Anthony Fauci.
He's director of the
National Institute for
Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, and has long
been involved in
vaccine development.
Dr. Fauci, everyone's
pretty excited about the
100 percent efficacy rate.
Let's look under the hood a bit.
This isn't the same type of
clinical trial that we're used
to in drug approval or vaccine
approval, is it?
DR.
ANTHONY FAUCI, NATIONAL
INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY
AND INFECTIOUS DISEASE:
No, it's a bit unusual.
The vaccine trial is referred
to as a ring vaccine trial
which means that cases were
identified in Guinea
that indeed had Ebola.
Then, instead of preemptively
ahead of time vaccinating whole
groups of populations, the
individuals were divided into
two separate groups, groups
that were vaccinated immediately
who had contact with the index
case or cases or contact of
contacts, and another group
that was vaccinated
21 days later.
So, it was more of an acute
response to an outbreak by
trying to protect those people
who were, in reality
or potentially exposed
to the index cases.
That's not the standard way
that you do a vaccine trial.
And so, although these results
are really quite encouraging,
there is still a lot more
work to be done on vaccines
for Ebola, and that's exactly
where we're heading with this,
to get many more people
in a larger trial and
to also determine, is
the effect durable?
In other words, if I vaccinate
you now, will you be protected
six months, eight months
or a year from now and
just how powerful that
protective response would be.
And that's really the kinds of
questions that still remain a
bit unanswered, despite the
fact that this finding now
from the Guinea trial is
really quite impressive.
SREENIVASAN: There was one
vaccine that was tested at the
center of this, but there are
multiple strains of Ebola.
FAUCI: That's another question
that needs to be answered
and it's a good point that
you bring up.
This vaccine that was
tested in Guinea against
the Zaire strain of Ebola.
There are more than one strain,
particularly, a second train
called the Sudan strain, but
maybe two other strains.
And when we ultimately
get the vaccine that
what we would consider
to be the optimal season,
we would want one that, A, has
a great durability of effect,
that would be effective over a
considerable period of time,
and, B, something that would
be able to protect essentially
against all strains of Ebola,
because there are different
strains that pop up in different
parts of sub-Saharan Africa,
and we have clear-cut
experience with that.
SREENIVASAN: So, given the
test that's just been done with
this specific vaccine, this
is not like a polio vaccine
where you get it once in your
life and you're vaccinated.
You're still going to need a
lot more tests to figure out
that combination of different
viruses and how long they last.
FAUCI: Absolutely.
Those are critical
questions that you ask.
This -- some people when they
hear about how really impressive
the results are, they think,
OK, we're done now with the
Ebola vaccine, we're going to
move on because we've solved
the problem.
We haven't come anywhere
near solving the problem
because there are still
so many unanswered
questions that we need to pursue
before we get a vaccine that
we feel would be universally
able to be widespread
administered to people
to protect them from
outbreaks of Ebola of
multiple different strains.
There's a lot of
work to be done.
SREENIVASAN: All right.
While we have you, I also
wanted to just ask you about the
avian flu that's in Asia right
now.
We're reporting about the
millions of birds in Korea and
other parts of Asia that have
been culled already.
How concerned should
we about this?
FAUCI: We need to pay
attention to this.
I don't think there's any real
need to panic at all about it,
because we have been following
outbreaks of bird
flu for decades.
The first time we got involved
with it here was back in the
'90s in Hong Kong when you
had the H5N1 which are viruses
that are influenza viruses that
are fundamentally viruses of
fowl, water fowl, or
chickens, sometimes
pigs and other animals.
They rarely jump into species
and infect humans, and when they
do infect humans, they do not
efficiently spread
from human-to-human.
That's where most of the bird
flu situation is right now.
But having said that, we
always have to be alert for the
threat or the possibility that
they may, when they jump species
like from a chicken or another
type of a fowl to a human,
that they then become really
efficient in spreading
from person to person.
We've not seen that thus far.
Hopefully, we'll never see it,
but we've even begun trying to
develop vaccines against some
of these avian type flu.
So, no need to panic but
don't just blow it off.
We've got to keep
our eye out on it.
SREENIVASAN: All right.
Dr. Anthony Fauci,
thanks so much.
FAUCI: Good to be with you.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields and David Brooks
take on this week's news,
and our troops send
their holiday cheer.
But first, thousands of Haitians
are waiting to get into the
U.S., and thousands more are
on their way through
Latin America.
Hurricane Matthew -- which
killed hundreds of Haitians and
destroyed thousands of homes
- - has upped the stakes for
their migrating relatives.
Jean Guerrero, our partners at
location station KPBS Fronteras
reporter, has the story.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JEAN GUERRERO, KPBS FRONTERAS
REPORTER: The surge of
Haitians started in May.
U.S. customs officials couldn't
process them fast enough, and
a backlog formed in Tijuana.
Here, shelters like Desayunador
Salesiano have had to improvise
spaces for the migrants,
as they wait for their
turn to cross into the U.S.
The destruction wrought
by hurricane Matthew
about two months ago
has left these Haitian
migrants more
desperate than ever.
LEONARDO MARTINEZ, DESAYUNADOR
SALESIANO COORDINATOR
(through translator):
They have family members
who've suffered, and their
concern is to help them from
here, or from the United States.
GUERRERO: One of those Haitians
is Frederic Saint Cois, whose
family in Haiti survived
the devastating floods.
But he wants to send them
money so they can get by in
the newly ravaged country.
He hopes to find
a job in the U.S.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE (through
translator): We came
here looking for life.
GUERRERO: He said he spent a lot
of money to make it this far,
as did his fellow travelers.
The journey involved long
walking stretches, bus travel
and more through some of Latin
America's most
dangerous countries.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE (through
translator): I saw
many, many people die.
GUERRERO: That's why
sudden shifts in U.S.
immigration policy have
left him so bewildered.
Since the 2010 earthquake, the
U.S. has been letting Haitians
in under a humanitarian parole
provision.
But a few weeks ago, responding
to the overwhelming influx of
migrants, the U.S. revokes that
privilege.
The decision to resume
deportations was motivated by
improved conditions in Haiti.
But Hurricane Matthew struck
a few days later, plunging
the country back into crisis.
Even so, officials continued
detaining and deporting
new Haitian arrivals.
But recent overcrowding
in detention centers have
led officials to allow
some Haitian migrants
to enter the U.S.
Among the Haitians who managed
to cross into the U.S. before
the policy changes is Sandra
Alexandre, whose baby
was born hours after
she crossed the border.
The baby's father, Volcy
(ph), missed the birth and
still hasn't met his daughter.
He was supposed to cross a
few days after Sandra, right
when the policy shifted.
When he crossed, he was
placed in an immigration
detention center.
He still hasn't been released.
SANDRA ALEXANDRE, HAITIAN
MIGRANT (through translator):
It's very difficult for me and
for the baby.
I don't know when he's
going to come here.
GUERRERO: Alexandre says she
wishes she'd known the policy
was going to change before
making the dangerous trek
through Latin America
with her fiance, while
she was nine months
pregnant.
Many times she almost gave up.
ALEXANDRE: I was like, "it's
too difficult, I won't make
it," but Volcy said, "Yes, you
can make it.
Little by little, but
you're going to make it.
Be brave."
GUERRERO: She says she
can't go back to Haiti.
ALEXANDRE: In Haiti,
life is very difficult.
Very, very, very difficult.
It's also very dangerous.
GUERRERO: In the meantime,
Tijuana residents are
responding to Haitians
with unusual hospitality.
All day, they stop by the
migrant shelters where Haitians
congregate, giving away clothes,
dropping off snacks like
sandwiches and sports drinks,
even preparing full meals.
JANETH AGUILAR, TIJUANA
RESIDENT (through translator):
We come every day with them.
We bring them candy, food.
We're with them a little while.
Yesterday, they braided
my whole head of hair.
GUERRERO: She remembers when
she first saw the large crowds
of Haitians on the streets.
It was an unusual sight
-- only about 1 percent of
Mexico's population is black.
Aguilar went online to find
out what was happening.
She learned that the migrants
were coming from countries
with political and economic
crises, and she wanted to help.
AGUILAR: We come to give
them a happy moment.
Since they lack everything,
we want to make sure
they don't lack a smile.
GUERRERO: The streets of Tijuana
have long been filled with
migrants heading to the U.S.,
as well as the deported
-- mostly from southern
Mexico and Central America.
Those migrants are often
shunned by the locals, forced to
live out of sight, in sewers.
When Tijuana residents recently
set up a table on the street,
offering fried chicken, rice
and beans to the Haitians, a
Mexican migrant got in line.
Jorge Cruz, a Tijuana taxi
driver who brought the chicken,
was not happy about that.
JORGE CRUZ, TIJUANA DRIVER
(through translator): I
told him, "You're Mexican,
what do you lack?"
GUERRERO: Despite the warm
welcome in Mexico, the Haitians
are intent on making it into
the U.S.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE (through
translator): I have
faith in Christ, in God.
God is always helping me.
GUERRERO: He knows he might
be placed in a detention
center and deported.
But that's not going to stop
him from trying, and hoping.
For the "PBS NewsHour", I'm Jean
Guerrero in Tijuana, Mexico.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: And to the analysis
of Shields and Brooks.
That is syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and "New York
Times" columnist David Brooks.
Gentlemen, welcome.
So let's start out talking
about two major foreign policy
waves, I guess you could say,
that Donald Trump is
making today, David.
He directly intervened with
the White House as they were
deciding how to handle this U.N.
resolution on Israel.
There is now an open rift
with President Obama.
This is different, isn't
it, from the way we see a
transition normally work?
DAVID BROOKS, NEW YORK
TIMES COLUMNIST: Certainly,
the country can't have
two presidents at once,
so the tradition has been
to hang back if you're
the president-elect
and wait for your
time in office.
Trump is not a
hang-back kind of guy.
And he has shifted --- President
Obama has shifted American
policy in a much more critical
way in Israel with the
settlements than the
previous presidents.
But we're about to
get a head-snapping
shift the other way.
President-elect Trump's
ambassador to Israel is further
to the right than almost anyone
in Israel, further to the right
than Bibi Netanyahu on the
settlements, and almost opposes
the two-state
solution, doesn't he?
So, we are about to see a
tremendous shift in American
policy toward the Middle East.
WOODRUFF: How do
you see this, Mark?
Are there consequences of
this or is this going to be
something we look back on and
say, well, that's what happened?
MARK SHIELDS, SYNDICATED
COLUMNIST: No, I mean, I think
Donald Trump is sui generis.
I mean, he is acting by
president or tradition.
He's acting as Donald Trump
has throughout his entire
public career of, what, a year
and a half, and that is to be
impulsive, be spontaneous, keep
his opponents or adversaries
off balance.
That's his approach.
He is not into nuance,
that is not his strength.
And the president said this
week, he's entitled to his own
policies and but just hope that
it's deliberate and thoughtful.
And this strikes
me as anything but.
WOODRUFF: Well, in addition to
Israel, what we were sitting
here talking about nuclear
policy because Donald Trump
tweeted, as far as we can tell,
out of the blue yesterday,
David, that the United
States needs to beef
up its nuclear arsenal.
He did an interview with Mika
Brzezinski of NBC this morning
and I'm just reading the
quote here.
He said, "Let it be an arms
race, we will outmatch them
at every pass and outlast them
all."
So, what does this say?
BROOKS: Yes, one of the things
I think about with Donald Trump
is what are his words actually
attached to?
With a normal president like
President Obama, he says a word,
and that's because there has
been some thought that he's
done and there had been
policy papers and there's been
aides and there's been
advisors and then there is a
connection to an actual set of
policies.
And so, the words like have
roots into actual stuff.
With Trump, I'm not sure
the words have roots.
They are emanations
of his psyche, but has
he thought it through?
Is there an argument, is
there a policy implication?
Even in this nuclear
thing, he says we should
be stronger and expand.
What does that mean?
So, what is concrete
in what he's saying?
And I think as we interpret him
and frankly as the world learns
to interpret Donald Trump,
are these just words that are
enigmatic things floating on
air or are they actually shifts
in policy and will they
change moment by moment,
day by day without any
underlying connection
to the actual stuff
of governance?
I don't know.
WOODRUFF: Mark, we're talking
about nuclear arms policy.
This is something that in the
past, it was something that
people spent time thinking
about before
statements were made.
You know, you said a minute
ago, you think he's keeping
everybody off balance.
Is this a deliberate strategy?
SHIELDS: Well, I think
that's part of it.
The points David make
I think really deserve
reflection and consideration.
I think Donald Trump,
we have to understand,
has not had experiences
like any other president
we've ever had.
He's never been accountable
to anybody, save Donald Trump.
I mean, he has no investors.
He has -- he has debtors,
but he doesn't have
a board of directors.
He doesn't have a corporate
structure he's had to answer to.
So he's been able to kind
of wing it at every stage.
I just don't think he
understands -- the point
David was making is
when a president makes
a statement, Judy, it is studied
around the world, the nuance
and was there an emphasis
here, and what was
in the last statement
that's missing -- perhaps
overly done, maybe overly
analyzed.
But because the president's
words are pretentious,
they really carry with
them enormous significance
and are usually reflective
of great consideration
and even arguments
within that one side is
wanted, one particular paragraph
or sentence, while the other
said, no, that shouldn't be
in there.
So, I just think that Trump
-- he has not made the
transition, it seems to me, from
candidate to even
president in waiting.
He has been a sore winner.
He continues to in his rallies
to berate Hillary Clinton.
That sense of gracious,
generosity or larger vision
has eluded him so far.
WOODRUFF: But, David, some --
not but -- and some people,
David, have looked at what he's
doing and they said, this is
really part of a strategy.
Keep people off balance,
keep them guessing about
what you're going to do.
BROOKS: I think that's
a rationalization for
just the way he is.
But it does have the effect
of keeping people off balance.
I'm not sure that's
necessarily a good thing.
And to bring us back to the
nuclear thing, keeping people
off balance with nuclear weapons
is not a good thing at all.
SHIELDS: No.
BROOKS: And -- so I
would say, given, as Mark
describes, sort of -- he's
not part of a process.
And so, I think there
are two things that could
happen as a result of this.
One, it's possible to
imagine him having relatively
little influence on his
own government because
he will be off in his own
world and the agencies
and the permanent
bureaucracy will just go
on and do its merry way.
There is a lot of passive
aggressive behavior
in all governments.
It's very hard to
get things done.
But at the same time, because
he's not tied down, there
could be a lot of erraticness
and he could get caught up, just
the macho thing, especially,
let's say Vladimir Putin,
or somebody like that, and then
more and more erratic with,
you know, potentially, some
sort of nuclear
weapons attached.
SHIELDS: It was even suggested
to me, apropos the point David
was making, that Republicans
and Democrats have been
adversaries for a long
time on foreign policy.
But, I mean, it could be a
common interest at some point in
sort of uniting in solidarity.
I mean, we've had every
president, Judy - - I mean,
John Kennedy began in 1963 with
a nuclear test ban treaty
banning, you know - -
agreeing with the Soviets
to ban all testing
in the atmosphere or
space or underwater.
I mean, that has been the
guide of every president.
I mean, Ronald Reagan who came
in as the leader of the toughest
Soviet bloc, the evil empire
- - I mean, ended up as really
a possible arms reduction
advocate, a champion of it.
When Mikhail Gorbachev
-- you know, I mean,
it's been the policy of
both parties, presidents
of both parties, and just to
see something like this cast
aside as an aside, as his own
people are going on the
air last night explaining
what he actually meant
was to stabilize or
modernize.
Then, he goes on with Mika
Brzezinski this morning before
the show and says, no, no,
what he said
originally he meant.
I mean --
WOODRUFF: An arms race.
SHIELDS: Yes.
WOODRUFF: And we'll
outlast them all.
So even he's got -- he seems
to have a lot of support among
Republicans and even Democrats
for his position on
Israel, nuclear -- nuclear
is something different.
SHIELDS: Yes.
WOODRUFF: I want to
ask you about incoming
Trump administration
potential conflicts of
interest.
Story in the "Wall Street
Journal" this week, David, about
Tom Price, the congressman from
Georgia having done
stock trading in the
last few years and health
medical companies, he's
going to be overseeing
these policies -- he
was voting observe these
policies as a congressman,
he will be overseeing
that at the Department of
Health and Human Services.
Carl Icahn named as an
informal to the president
on business regulation.
He's somebody who's got
enormous business interest.
And then there's the story
about Eric Trump, his son and
the charitable organization.
Do we -- how do we even get
our arms around all this?
BROOKS: Well, to me, it's
mostly about public trust.
Do -- can you trust people to
do their public service roles
in a pretty much straight-up,
honorable way on the
merits of the issues?
And I happen to think most
people go into government do
it for the right reasons and
they really do things
as they see them on the
merits of the issues.
But it doesn't help if there's
the appearance and it doesn't
help if the standards by which
we separate public and
private life begin to erode.
And that generally was the
course -- you leave private life
behind when you go into public
life, because you're
not just a person.
You're inhabiting a role that
the Constitution gave you.
And I'm not sure Trump has had
that distinction between private
and public life in his head.
And so, I think there's likely
to be an erosion of just
that standard, that different
standard, consciousness, and
I think it's likely we'll
see what we haven't seen in
the last eight years and even
the last 12 or 16 of private
enrichment in office and
scandals where people have to
resign and things like that,
because just once the standards
go, behavior tends to go.
WOODRUFF: But, Mark, are his
supporters prepared to accept
a different standard for Donald
Trump?
SHIELDS: Well, no, I think
part of Donald Trump's appeal
is that he's a guy that does
cut corners, that he's the
guy that does get deals and
maybe does break a speed limit.
I think there was sort of a
roguish, rascally, but I get
things done even if I break the
rules.
But I do think, you know,
the words of Jefferson
echo even today, when
a man assumes a public
trust, he must assume he is
public property, and that's
exactly what's the case here.
I mean, Tom Price, I don't
know he had time to make votes
on the floor, he had such an
active stock portfolio
and in areas that he
was legislating on.
I mean, so that will be
a subject of hearings.
But Donald Trump's statement
that Carl Icahn, because he's
not taking a salary doesn't have
a conflict of
interest -- I'm sorry.
I mean, Carl Icahn has
major oil interests.
He urged and recommended
the appointment of
the EPA administrator,
and, you know, he was
championed for him.
Of course, there are
conflicts of interest.
It doesn't come
down to a salary.
It comes down to
your own enrichment.
And is there a difference?
Is there concept in Donald
Trump's mind of public policy
that there is a public interest
that is separate and distinct
from personal interest?
I don't know if there are people
around him, who -- certainly
they haven't been throughout
his career, who are
saying this is in the
greater public interest.
It just doesn't seem to be
part whether in his personal
behavior, personal comportment,
doesn't seem to be a
strong commitment or
value of public service.
WOODRUFF: We seem to keep coming
back, David, to this question
of what he was used to in
the private sector and what now
he faces in the public sector.
BROOKS: Right.
He's one thing.
Some people are very different
in different circumstances.
He's not.
He's one thing.
And he's been one thing.
Remember, we were
talking about he's got to
moderate his campaigns.
So, it's worked for him,
at least by his lights.
So, I imagine he's going to be
this way all straight through.
I can't imagine a 70-year-old
guy is going to change.
And so, he's going to be this
way and we're going to have
to cover it and the world is
going to have to -- I keep
coming back to the world
literally -- how much of this is
actual literal and how much
is a marketing guy who treats
words as tools for money?
And so, we're going to have
to adjust and not react a lot
of the time and think that
something's substantively
actually happening.
WOODRUFF: All right.
Gentlemen, we wish you a merry
Christmas, happy New York
and happy Hanukkah and every
holiday that's coming.
Thank you both.
BROOKS: Thank you.
SHIELDS: Thank you.
WOODRUFF: David, Mark.
SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Finally, to
celebrate the holiday spirit,
a special sing-a-long.
Join in with these members of
the military, serving around
the world.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
(SINGING "THE TWELVE
DAYS OF CHRISTMAS")
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: They
keep our country safe, and
can you imagine a better
way to say merry Christmas?
Thank you all.
So, on the "NewsHour" online
right now: everything you
learned about reindeer
from your favorite
Christmas cartoons
is probably wrong.
Our science team has seven
things you might not know about
these important arctic animals.
All that and more is on our
website: PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tonight on "Washington Week":
President Obama was elected on
the promise of hope and change.
Did he deliver?
A look at the Obama legacy.
On "PBS NewsHour
Weekend Saturday": a
new stage production
that gives Shakespeare's
"Othello" the hip hop treatment.
And that is the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On behalf of all of
us here, thank you.
If you observe it,
merry Christmas.
If not, have a great weekend.